Live this-- what I
consider a [INAUDIBLE] life
with three children, the wife.
And very necessary to
maintain it at all times
because I feel there is no place
for structures in my studio.
There is no place for rules.
And it's where one
can, if you will,
experience certain
kinds of madness.
My art is about my life.
I feel that I needn't paint
about anything outside of it
because it's--
if one could spend their life
painting about something,
I mean, I really intend to spend
mine painting about myself.
It's like a very long voyage.
I do what I do
because I have to.
I can't stop myself.
And I find that reason to
be about as interesting
as any for making anything.
My art does deal with the
things I am familiar with--
everyday objects,
parts of my body,
parts of my wife's
body, the tools I
grew up with, the bathrooms
in my uncle's store.
Those things are not done
as comments on our times.
I never think about
making art like that.
I'm more interested
in commenting
on them as things I like.
The more I learn
about myself, the more
I seem to have time
to put it into my art.
I mean, that is,
being psychoanalyzed
has liberated me from
all the sort of crud that
encrusts people from doing all
the things they want to do,
or being able to think
clearly about things,
or to have the time to do all
the things you want to do.
And that's what it
has done for me.
It's made my life
much less cumbersome.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
His work is tough, tough to
know because he pushes it
into areas of taste and
feeling and handling
and subject beyond
that of other painters.
Jim Dine, born in
Cincinnati, Ohio, 1935.
As part of the struggle with
the reality that surrounds him,
Dine's painting is continually
concerned with objects,
like his outspokenly
autobiographical series
on pallets.
And I made the
first palettes then.
Because all these things--
it was the first time
I really consciously
thought about myself.
And the first palette was
called The 1935 Palette.
In fact, last night,
someone was telling me
that they had an exhibit
at some university,
and they were hanging it.
And they saw behind
it, it said in honor
of the artist's birthday.
And that's when I really
consciously realized
that this is what I really
wanted to talk about,
was myself.
So in 1935-- it was in honor
of the date of my birth.
And then I got--
from the palletes,
I opened up more,
and I started to make
paintings of ties and coats.
Paintings like the ties bluntly
presented isolated, almost
rude objects, forcing us,
if we bothered to look,
to a reconsideration not
so much of the object,
but of ourselves.
Painters pushing out,
making discoveries
have always enraged
the sensibilities
of their audience.
Jim Dine, for
example, found himself
in the pages of Life Magazine.
The scene scurried after
him, and in its discomfort,
made him famous.
I made a painting
with a Derby hat
and then a real Derby
hat underneath of it,
like redundant.
Because sometimes, at
that point in particular,
I didn't trust things.
And if I made a painting of a
shoe and wrote shoe under it,
I felt it really got it across.
And also, it was a
way of being dumb,
which I liked at that time.
After the show of
ties and coats,
in about three
months after that,
I made about 30
paintings of tools.
It was a great burst.
His grandfather was in the
plumbing supply business,
and his father owned
a hardware store.
He grew up with tools.
And in the span of his work,
they are the one constant.
If the familiar world
of ties and shoes
and pliers and
hammers and wrenches
can be such a mysterious,
awkward, and tasteless place,
how safe are we ourselves?
From the tool paintings which
I did in the spring of 1962,
I went to East Hampton, Long
Island for the first time,
summer, where I
now have a house.
And I experienced being able to
go into a hardware store which
was absolutely complete
in its stock of things.
It was easy to see everything.
It was a big, roomy hardware
store, and you could browse.
You can't do that
in New York City.
And it was--
I opened a charge
account, and I saw things
that really, I felt--
it was like they were like
naturals for the paintings.
And I bought about
six medicine chests
without the thought of them--
what I would do with them.
But the fact is, I said, I
want six medicine chests,
and charge it.
And towel racks, and soap
and grab, and soap dishes.
And I started to
affix them to canvas.
And it was about having these
things around in your studio
as though you had
tubes of paint.
And they were the beginning
of the bathroom pictures.
The bathroom pictures were
shockers, nasty things
with disagreeable
colors and textures.
But their message was the most
uncomfortable thing about them,
for it had something to do
with how we see ourselves,
how we avoid ourselves.
At the time, I was making
two kinds of pictures.
One were the bathroom
pictures, and the other
were child's rooms.
I tried to simulate on the
canvas a kind of wallpaper
I remembered as a child--
stars on a blue field,
silver stars and moons
on a blue field, and
somehow talk about children
in bed at night, I guess.
I don't know.
Fixing on wallpaper,
whatever that means.
From the bathrooms and the
child's rooms and the shower
paintings, I went
back to palettes
in a very straight way.
I wanted to paint very hard
palettes, hard-edge palettes
with real palette
on the palette,
red against black, color charts,
very straight color chart.
I would but all the
red devil paints
available in the hardware store
and rule off even squares.
But it wasn't enough.
It was too cool.
It was too much without my hand.
It's a problem I have, I guess.
I can't maintain my cool.
I'm always being
sloppy, excessive.
And I made those
that spring of '63,
and in the summer of '63, made
pallets, but more painterly.
Now sensuous, now
cool, the curve
of the palette like the
curve of the Ohio River
or a woman's body, but still
the autobiographical palette
for Dine's painting is
also about painting.
From the palettes, one morning,
I looked at the New York Sunday
Times, and I saw an ad for a
red bathrobe on a black ground.
It had nobody in it, but--
there was someone in it, but
they had doctored the photo,
so it was just an empty
bathrobe standing there,
red on a black ground.
And it looked like me inside.
And I wanted to make a
self-portrait anyway, really
literally a self-portrait.
I thought this was the best
support for the self-portrait.
And I started superimposing
the robes on palettes
and had a show, mainly of
self-portraits of robes,
of bathrobes,
sometimes on pallets,
sometimes next to color
charts, sometimes silver point
on canvas.
Sometimes-- there was one I
had called Steven Han's Path
which was a lying-down
bathrobe on its side
with a 10-foot log
in front of it.
It was a tree I cut down
on Steven Han's path
in East Hampton, Long Island.
And I put the axes
into the tree.
And a painter I know saw
the painting, and he said,
he's so independent.
Don't you want to put a
little red from the robe
onto the log in front
of it or something?
And I realized-- I mean,
I trust objects so much.
I trust disparate
elements going together.
Nobody ever questions
glasses on a person's face.
No one's ever thought of
making skin-colored glasses.
I think anything goes
next to another thing.
It's just what you bring to it.
Anyway, after those paintings,
I started to make sculpture.
I didn't think I could
paint for a while.
I cast a pair of leather
motorcycle boots in plaster,
then cast aluminum.
I made a bench of them,
made a boot bench.
I made two long
boots lying down.
I've made about 15 pieces
of sculpture up to now--
a ribbon machine,
which I felt related
to the color charts, another
ribbon machine, an ax,
hammer doorway, some hands.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And I had this idea of making
furniture that was useless
or that was sculpture and
was furniture too, or--
very little on the
furniture side,
more on the sculpture side.
So I cast my wife's
torso in plaster.
I'm sure I didn't do it
right, but it worked.
And I had this beautiful cast.
It was extraordinary-looking
in itself.
And so then I had
this thing, and I
didn't know what to do with it.
So I thought, well, it
could be a terrific table.
So the first thing
I had was I was
going to cast it in Lucite,
clear Lucite, the whole thing.
But I felt that was a bit like
Laverne furniture somehow.
And so then finally, I got a
cast in bronze in the table.
Jim Dine makes but one
cast from his sculpture.
That's it.
That's enough.
I feel about my sculpture--
I don't make two paintings,
the same kind of paintings.
I don't like that idea, that
whole Lipschitz business,
that Rodan stuff and all
that crap, one over nine,
one over 90, whatever it means.
I'll put it in my
show, and then I
don't know what
will happen to it.
The sculptures are
so much different,
I think, in feeling
than my paintings,
because my paintings seem
to be layers of things.
And this bout with
sculpture I had,
because it was a molding
technique, a casting technique
and things, is all
about one thing.
It's about an object I made,
an object-- a sculpture table,
a boot bench, a boot,
three hats, whatever.
And so hence, they've kind
of lived by themselves
very independently.
And I'm not sure
all the times that's
completely satisfying to me.
But I'm going to show
them all together.
It's enough.
I'm not going to make anymore
sculpture for a while, anyway.
I did what I wanted to do.
I'm not sure what this
whole commercial world means
to all of us, to
myself, and to my peers,
because I see a hesitancy
to change on their parts.
On my part, I think,
it's very hard
to turn the corner
here, it seems to me,
at this point in our lives.
I'm more interested
in this point
at doing what I want to
do, not keeping to a theme,
not making everybody
comfortable by saying,
oh, yes, he's the
man who does ties.
He's the man who does bathrobes.
I'm really interested
in talking about myself,
but really without
all the accouterments
I've used up to now.
I don't know what
that means exactly
because I haven't done it yet.
I do know it doesn't mean
being Jim Dine, a pop artist.
It doesn't mean being Jim Dine,
one of the takeover generation.
It doesn't mean Jim
Dine, a new talent.
It means being by
myself, I think,
and trying to do something
that will be able to--
that I will be able to
talk as freely in my art,
have a dialogue
with my art as, say,
certain poets are able
to sing very freely.
I'd like that situation
of my art now.
I'm not interested
in being a master.
I'm not interested in having a
school because it's not my way.
I realize that.
I was interested in that once
because, I mean, what the hell?
It's secure.
It's followers, et
cetera, et cetera.
But I feel more than ever
like the man in the cold.
I feel very persona non
grata in the art scene.
I feel-- well, I feel very much
against the grain of things.
Well, obviously,
I'm not in the--
I'm not in the Barbara
Rose, Frank Stella school.
I'm not a Castelli man.
I'm not a company man.
I'm not a realist.
I'm not an abstract
expressionist.
I'm not even a pop
artist, really.
I mean, Lichtenstein,
Rosenquist, Oldenburg,
Wesselmann, and Warhol
are pop artists.
They deal with popular imagery.
I just happen to
live at this time
and know them and happen
to use certain things which
could be called popular
imagery, but no more anyway,
so what difference does it make?
I'm just me.
And that's the
way it's gotta be.
And sometimes it's
very unpleasant,
and sometimes it's very nice.
You know?
It's as complicated as that.
I don't care any longer
about the avant garde per se.
It's meaningless.
It's too easy to be--
it's too easy to be a shocker.
You can be a movie
star all your life,
and you can never do any work.
I've had being a
starlet, and that
doesn't interest me at all.
I found that people wanted
to see me rather than they
wanted to see my paintings.
It's a whole thing in New
York particularly now.
They want to see you.
They want to see how
your wife dresses.
They want to see--
are you wearing
[INAUDIBLE] boots?
Does he wear lipstick?
Has he had his teeth capped?
CBS would call me.
ABC would call me Will
you be on this panel show?
Will you be on that panel
show with Lichtenstein,
et cetera, et cetera?
And I said no.
And I probably cut my
own throat that way,
in a kind of public
relations way,
because they stopped
calling, I noticed.
But that's not what
I'm involved in.
I'm only 30, and I don't
know what I'm doing yet.
And I sometimes get a slight
inkling of what I'm doing.
And that comes from
growing and making
a backlog of ideas and images
and experiencing certain things
in your art.
So what the hell
does the fame mean?
It doesn't mean anything.
I mean, I live pretty good,
but I always lived good.
I was making $4,000 a
year as a schoolteacher.
We lived damn good.
I just didn't have
as many suits.
Nancy didn't have
as much clothes.
We didn't have steak every
night, but we ate damn well.
Most of my friends
aren't painters.
I find I relate
much more to the--
to people who have
kids my age, to people
who are interested
in civic things,
or interested in the
school I'm interested in,
or that kind of stuff.
And I'm interested
in showbiz types.
I really like them much
better than painters.
They're much more
interesting, you know.
And I think in another
life, I would rather
have been an actor.
The most recent
theater piece I did--
I hadn't done one,
as I said before.
I stopped them when we were all
doing the happenings because I
thought they were too chic.
Well, then last spring, I had
the opportunity to do one again
[INAUDIBLE] and Oldenburg at
this theater rally in Whitman.
And I made a piece called
Natural History, then
in parentheses, The Dreams.
And it was--
I used exposure of
myself as a medium.
I knew people wouldn't like it.
They'd say they were bored when
they meant they were nervous.
They didn't want to hear it.
It's much easier to
say you're bored.
And they said things
like, well, we
don't want to see his problems.
We don't need to
see his problems.
Obviously, he's
copped out from art.
But I believe that exposure
can be used as a medium,
and I was totally
pleased with what I did.
It was completely
successful because it
was about exposing
yourself, making
it difficult for the
audience through exposure,
asking them to relate
to you, whether you're
relating to them.
Jim Dine was instrumental in the
shaping of a new American art
form--
happenings, a kind of
living art grown out
of the need for closer contact
with a viewer, the need
to speak more directly.
I was to take a girl
home for some reason.
I started walking outside, and
I knew in the distance something
was going on.
Something was going to happen.
Let's get inside.
And there's a flash of light.
[INAUDIBLE]
It's a hydrogen bomb test blast.
And I keep running
down the hallways.
Let's go up as far as
we can go so that we--
when the all clear sounds,
we can beat the crowd
to the shelter.
Then I decided to leave,
and we walked out the door.
And the scientist says stop.
We've been exposed to radiation.
I have to go to
the doctor to see
what extent the damage is done.
Am I radiated?
And the images in
the theater piece
were only meant to
supplement the voice.
The voice-- probably if
I had any nerve at all,
I would have just played the
tape, because the images were
the most ephemeral part of it.
Even though to me
they were meaningful,
I just think the tape
was powerful enough.
I think a man's dreams of a
summer during one summer is--
whoever the man is--
is so powerful.
I mean, I'm so--
I trust so implicitly
and thoroughly--
I trust so thoroughly the
meat of the unconscious.
I recently returned from
Oberlin College, where
I was artist in residence.
I was there for 10 days.
I had a show there.
And I made 30 collages
while I was there.
And I once again experienced
this kind of freedom
in not being in
New York City, not
having to worry about the
approval of the group.
From those collages,
these things
are related-- not directly.
But the way I worked, I felt,
was such a natural one for me--
that is, in series, one
right after the other.
Well, I got these seven
canvases all the same size.
They're 7 feet by 5 feet.
And they're called--
all of them are called
A Period, Our Period in Oberlin.
I really don't paint
anymore in the old sense.
I've cut that out
almost completely.
I noticed that I have tubes
of paint around that I
had five years ago, which
never would have been the case
five years ago.
I used to paint like mad.
Now it's-- I mean, I've sprayed
all these canvases one color
to begin with.
That is a kind of sapphire
metallic blue automobile paint.
And they're all-- there
are irregularities in them
which I like, but that's because
of my bad spray techniques.
But I like that.
And then on that,
I'm building things.
In fact, I'm using a lot of
the elements of those things
I've cast in the work
in other contexts
because I have them around--
well, like in the one
with the garters, with the
black elastic and things.
It has an aluminum
base on the floor which
I didn't use for a sculpture,
but it's a rectangle.
And it has an anonymity
about it that I like.
I mean, it's really
no one-- what is it?
I mean, I don't know what
the hell it is, you know?
And the A Period, Our Period
is the name of someone
I knew in Oberlin
whose intensity
and whose anxieties about art
and about being a human being
were similar to
mine at that age.
And I identified with
the person and felt
it was a way to talk about
myself through someone else.
It was a literary
idea, almost, I
would think, which I'm more
interested in anyway now.
I was just driving down
the street the other day,
and I saw a red door framed.
And the red just
sort of stood away,
like it was glowing, like
someone had plugged it in.
And suddenly,
[MAKES WAVING NOISE],, you
know, like neon or something.
And so I was-- this looks
like that to me too.
It lays out there
in its own life.
It doesn't-- that's what's nice
about this background I have.
It's not like bare canvas, which
I often use, or bare paper,
and then make things on it and
tear it or use the bare canvas.
That's so sensitive and
beautiful, and this is so ugly,
and it's so intense.
You can't get away from it.
I've really come to hate
the surface, which I like.
I mean, I like this sort
of hating the surface idea
because it makes for such a
difficult thing for things
to live on so that they really--
everything you put on it
is rejected by the surface.
You know?
Nothing melts in at all.
And that's why I like it.
It all just hangs there.
I feel so unsettled
about what I do.
And I feel that
anything is possible.
And I'm very uncomfortable
when I make the things I make.
And I know that people
who see them, many people
are uncomfortable.
I never get a
middle-of-the-road reaction.
Most people say, [WRETCHES],,
it's horrible, I hate it,
it makes me nervous,
or it's beautiful.
I know that the
ugliness in my art--
what is called ugly is that
which is not generally thought
of as beautiful today.
As an American growing up in a
Protestant, Puritan tradition
of it's wrong to feel pleasure,
I'm a product of that.
I'm not able to experience
pleasure easily,
and it's as though
something's wrong with it
if does come easy,
if it is pleasurable.
That's one of the
kernels in my art--
stopping the facility,
stopping the pleasure,
and making it hard for yourself.
I don't want anybody to
know how well I do things
because for me, it's like
my grandpa, you know?
He never felt
comfortable unless he
went to work, even on Sunday.
And it's in that tradition.
I like that thing of
pushing yourself just
past the brink of it
being pleasant to do where
you're uncomfortable doing it.
You check your facilities.
You check everything, and
you purposely find yourself.
It's about repression too.
It's about wearing
chastity belts.
It's about tying
yourself up with ropes.
It's about structuring
yourself with wires.
All these things make
me uncomfortable.
I know they make the
viewer uncomfortable.
Ultimately, I think that's
the kind of thing that will--
well, it's like the
Japanese potters.
The best potters in
Japan, the great men
in the end of their life
feel comfortable enough,
after making beautifully
refined things,
to make raku ware, which
is for the tea ceremony,
and which is thrown away.
It's just a piece of clay.
It's like that.
You drink the tea,
and you throw it away.
That's the pinnacle of
their art in ugliness,
in what is called ugly in the
kind of direct, simple thing
that they make in
spite of their talent,
in spite of their talent.
That's much more
interesting to me.
It's like-- it's like--
I feel like painting
a picture, and it's
like holding my left hand,
because I'm left-handed,
and not painting with
my right, but trying
to paint the picture while
I'm holding my left hand
and trying to get it
out to paint it with.
That interests me.
I think those are
the things that--
that's the best way
I can talk in my art.
Dine says he does what he
has to do, paints the way
he does because there
is no other way.
And so his work is
symptomatic of the scene
today, of the attitude
of many painters.
In the balance of this series on
contemporary American artists,
we will explore this
new sensibility.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is NET, the National
Educational Television Network.